---
layout: post
title: "Voting and the Electoral System"
permalink: "/voting/"
description: 'Giving everyone a voice in our government'
---

Making Voting Easy for All
==========================

Our democracy relies on everyone voicing their opinion on how our country should be run. Until everyone gets a fair chance to be informed and vote, we will not have a true democracy.

Automatic Voter Registration
----------------------------

Our current system forces voters to register to vote well in advance, and has many deadlines that if not followed, could result in the potential voter being ineligible to vote. If all eligible voters were automatically registered (generally this would be upon turning 18), the proccess would be greatly simplified and an unnecessary step removed.

Voting by Mail
--------------

Oregon has one of the highest voter turnouts in the country, and one of the most important lessons the rest of the US can learn from it is why voting by mail works. All eligible voters are mailed a ballot several weeks before each election, allowing voters to research the candidates before making a decision. Then, the ballots simply have to be turned in to a ballot box by the specified time on election day. To prevent fraud, ballots have unique scannable codes that can be used to track when your vote is counted, and to make sure you get your ballot. If the United States as a whole adopted this system, voter turnout would almost certainly go up. 

If voting requires people to go to the polls on election day, many people will not be able to make it due to other business or simply because the polling place may be difficult for some people to get to. With voting by mail, there is no need to go in person - all you have to do is drop your ballot into one of the many ballot boxes before election day. This also greatly reduces the issue of voter intimidation at the polls.

Giving the People More of an Influence in Elections
===================================================

Today, the voice of voters is greatly diminished by special interest groups, big money in politics, and by political parties. Our electoral system needs to be seriously reformed to give the power back to the people.

### Get Big Money Out of Politics

Currently, there are limits to how much someone can donate to a political campaign. However, there are many loopholes that are being exploited - SuperPACs are large groups that can take unlimited funds from undisclosed donors and use them to promote certain issues or candidates. This allows billionaires and huge corporations to have a much bigger say in politics than anyone else. SuperPACs are possible in part because of a Supreme Count decision called Citizens United, and this decision needs to be overturned. Furthermore, corporations must not be allowed to donate to political causes because they are not people and don't have to "live" in our society - let the employees and owners of the corporation decide who to support, not the corporation itself. Limits need to be put on the amount of contributions to political campaigns and parties, so that the very wealthy to not get to have more of a say than the average American. To encourage people to donate, every citizen should be given a certain amount of donation money that is tax-deductible. That is, if you donate up to a certain amount, that amount will come out of your taxes. This ensures that everyone is able to support a candidate that represents them both by voting and financially. 

### Instant Runoff Voting

Our current voting system is known as "first past the post". That means that right now, winning an election simply requires having more votes than anyone else. That may seem fair at first, but consider an election where there are 5 candidates (our elections usually only have two major candidates in the end - the next point addresses this issue). The top candidate may win with 30% of the vote, even if the other 70% strongly dislike him or her! [This video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Y3jE3B8HsE) best explains instant runoff voting, also known as the alternative vote. Instant runoff voting allows voters to rank candidates, so when the votes are cast, the one with the fewest first-choice votes is eliminated and everyone who voted for him or her will have their vote moved to their next choice. This cycle continues until there is only one candidate. With instant runoff voting, the vote can never be "split" - if you like one candidate more but are worried that they are unelectable, you can rank them first and the next candidate second, so the next candidate will get your vote if the first one doesn't win.

### Reform the Political Party System

Our party system needs a radical change. In order to get elected, it is almost imporative that a candidate runs either as a Democrat or a Republican - it's very difficlt to run in another party or as an independent. Furthermore, the leadership of political parties plays a huge role in deciding who to nominate to represent them in the general election. That means that a small group of leaders has a very large say in who the candidates running will be. Thanks to instant runoff voting, there will be no need for primaries as multiple candidates from the same party can run at the same time, and party endorsements will not mean as much. While parties should be allowed to endorse candidates, fundraise, and organize debates, there need to be limits on how much they influence an election. With instant runoff voting, it's probably that many new parties will emerge, giving voters more than just the two standard choices.